=======================
Stream of Consciousness
=======================

*Random ramble at the edge of reason.*

----

**Fri 19 Jun 2020 02:30:05 PM CEST**

Just had a nice thought... Is there a real x such that x^x=i ?

Suppose by contradiction

.. math:: x \in \mathbb{R}, x^x=i

Then,

.. math::

   \ln(x^x) = \ln(i)

   x\ln(x) = \ln(i) = \ln(e^{i\pi/2}) = i\pi/2

   x\ln(x) = i\pi/2

But

.. math:: x^x=i \implies x\ln(x)=x^x \pi/2

Then, by taking the derivative on both sides

.. math:: (2/\pi) \cdot (1+\ln(x)) = x^x \cdot (1+\ln(x))

We can't simplify if 1+ln(x)=0 which happens for x=e^-1, so let's consider
that case first.

.. math::

    x = e^{-1} \implies e^{-1}\cdot\ln(e^{-1}) = i\pi/2

    \implies -e^{-1} = i\pi/2

which is false. So e^-1 can't be solution of our equation. Let's continue
with xâ‰ e^-1 by simplifying left and right the (1+\ln(x)) term:

.. math::

    2/\pi = x^x

    2/\pi = (2/\pi) \cdot x \ln(x)

    1 = x\ln(x)

    e = x^x

But as previously established

.. math::

   x^x = 2/\pi \implies e = 2/\pi

Which is false. Therefore since supposing the existence of a solution leads
only to contradiction we proved that no real number is solution.

.. math:: \nexists x \in \mathbb{R}, x^x=i

Nothing groundbreaking, just a thought. It's funny how all my proofs end up
being proofs by contradiction one way or another even though it is frowned
upon in serious circles.

----

**Wed 17 Jun 2020 07:43:58 PM CEST**

I just tried cooking Corned Beef for the first time.

With the whole Covid-19 thing I noticed that my main issue with food wasn't
longevity but diversity and while I had no issue finding really good canned
fish, beef was another matter entirely.

And now I think I know why. It's pretty strange stuff. The can I used was as
"pur" beef as you can get, 98.7% beast and a dash of salt and E250. The smell
is not nice. You can get used to it I think. It's has a vibrant red color
which, for some reason, didn't change at all when cooked in a hot pan. This
is unusual. Beef turns grey normally when cooked. This did not change color a
bit. There's no colourant indicated though. Weird.

I had some rice and pasta leftovers so I mixed them all in a hot pan with a
dash of olive oil and the meat. Really basic, just to get a feel of the food.
I ended up adding quite a lot of black pepper and garlic as well as some hot
pepper and salt. I would really have liked an onion but there was none to be
found. Generally trying to overspice food is not a good sign, and rightly so,
but now it kind of smell like american hamburgers, where there is more spice
and herbs than actual meat.

Weird. Not bad though. Bit too much to pepper.

Will I start pilling beef cans in my stock? Probably not. The taste isn't
worth it and these cans are too big for a single meal so I'm stuck with it
for the next day at least. I would much rather have more kind of fish cans
and complete dishes such as canned raviolis in case I really start craving
meat. Still, this was a nice experience overall.

